Dear friend, I have received both your letters & the papers, which you sent, and thank you for the one & the other.
In regard to your letter, the one before last, in which you write that soon you will have formed a community, I wished to answer you the following:
Of course one can not but desire the largest spreading of that which one regards as the truth, and not only as an abstract truth, but as a practical one, such a truth, the acceptation of which would deliver men from their miseries and give them the greatest welfare; but, strange though it seems to say so nothing has so much hindered the spreading of the truth, as the too hasty desire to make others accept it.
I have always been deeply affected by the seldom noticed words of Christ to his 70 disciples, when they returned from preaching and boasted of their success, saying that everywhere the devils were subject unto them: «In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather, because your names are written in heaven». In other words: seek not exterior success visible to all men, do not count your proselytes, as do the churchmen & the salvation army,[1] but seek to be in the truth, never to deviate from it & success, thoough perhaps invisible to you, will follow, will certainly follow, because when a man is in the truth he will act and his action will inevitably have the most fruitful results, if even they will not be visible to him. The same is expressed in the words «Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness & all these things shall be added unto you»; & in the words: «Be ye wise as serpents, & harmless as doves».
Truth in order to influence men should be complete, not clipped, not adapted to the life of men of the world. And this is always being forgotten by mankind. And owing to this the most powerful efforts have been and are yet lost in vain. Precious is not that community which we may organize at Toula or Croydon[3] with the help of those near to us in time and space, although such a community may also have its object & signification, but precious is that community of men of all times and nations, who unite in the one truth, in which I have been brought into communion with men, so distant from me in space & time, & amongst others with you.
The community, which is now necessary for mankind, will be composed not of men, who will unite in order to realize certain economical aims advantageous for themselves, like that «Brotherhood of Trust»,[4] of which you sent me the description but of those men, who are dispersed everywhere & have once for all renounced all wordly aims & have consecrated their lives solely to the service of God.
All the grandest undertakings have not only come to nought, but have turned against the very cause, which they were intended to serve; and that only owing to haste, to the desire of men to convert the greatest possible quantity of other men in the shortest possible time; or if they can not convert them, make them appear to be converted. Thus in the first instance Paul began to clip the demands of Christ & to adapt them to the existing order of things; this, but in enormous dimensions, Constantine[5] in order to make them accessible to himself & his nation. Thus dealt all those introducers of Christianity into England, France, Russia, who almost compulsorily christened their people. And thus do pervert christianity all founders & organisators of sects from the Mormons[6] to the Salvation Army. This haste has always been and continues to be the great drawback to the spreading of Christianity.
Let us with all our strength keep to the whole truth for ourselves in the full light in which it is unfolded to us, and this light will inevitably enlighten those around us, & this same truth will inevitably unite us all together without our troubling ourselves about it; because there is only one truth and men can unite only into them.
What profound and good undertakings were those of St. Simon,[7] Fourier,[8] Proudhon,[9] Robert Owen[10] and of hundred of other founders of communities in America, and what is now left of them? And how insignificant was the life of the Nasareth carpenter,[11] who was hung for words which displeased the authorities of his time, and yet how enormous the results.[12]
Anarchism is a striking sign of the times. It is the beginning of the ruin of old order of things. And when the old is coming to ruin, it is impossible to build. All that is possible is to prove, to explain, to demonstrate the lawfulness of this ruin, the possibility and necessity of a new construction and to show the foundations upon which it can be done. In times like ours, when the existing order is falling to pieces under its own weight, what the men are especially in want of is a[13] beacon, which would attract them. And it is this beacon of true (genuine) Christianity which we must endeavour not to obscure. This is the most important and fruitful work we can do.
Let us therefore retain for it all our strength. Let us retain our chief exertion, all our efforts and all our attention in order not to deviate from the truth, not to diminish it, not voluntarily to yield to any compromise. If in our lives we may not be able to accomplish completely the truth which we know, then let the fault of this lie solely in our imperfection and weakness, but not in our voluntary diminishment or deterioration of the truth.
Let us seek the truth. Let us seek the kingdom of God & his righteousness, and steadily believe, that all these things (including our influence upon other men) shall be added unto us.
Your work is especially dear to me in that you are not afraid of professing the whole truth without those limitation, by the means of which it is rendered powerless. I very much appreciated therefore your article in the «Young Methodist».[14] In order that fire should burn, that fire which Christ desired to send on the earth, it is necessary that it should be fire, and not an extinguished, only fumigating (smouldering) torch.
Дорогой друг,
Получил два ваши письма и газеты, которые вы присылаете, и благодарю вас за то и другое.
На предпоследнее письмо ваше, в котором вы пишете, что скоро у вас составится община, community, я хотел отвечать вам следующее:
Конечно, нельзя не желать наибольшего распространения того, что считаешь истиной, и не только отвлеченной истиной, но истиной практической, такой, признание которой избавит людей от их бедствий и даст им величайшее благо; но, как ни странно сказать это, ничто не препятствовало столько распространению истины, как слишком поспешное желание заставить других принять ее.
Меня всегда поражали мало замеченные вообще слова Христа своим 70 ученикам, когда они вернулись с проповеди и хвалились своими успехами, говоря, что везде бесы повинуются им: «Не ищите того, чтобы бесы повиновались вам, а того, чтобы имена ваши были написаны на небесах». Другими словами: не ищите внешнего, видимого всем успеха, не перечисляйте своих прозелитов, как церковники и армия спасения,[1] а ищите того, чтобы быть в истине, никогда не отступать от нее, и успех, может быть и невидимый, будет, наверное будет, потому что, когда человек отыщет истину, действие неизбежно будет, хотя бы оно было и невидимо для него. То же говорят и слова: «Ищите царства божия и правды его, а остальное приложится вам», и слова: «Будьте чисты, как голуби, и мудры, как змии».
Истина, чтобы действовать на людей, должна быть полною, неурезанною, не сделанною à l’usage des gens du monde.[2] И это-то всегда забывается людьми. И это делает тщетными самые могущественные усилия. Драгоценна не та община, которую мы образуем в Туле или Croydon’e[3] из близких по времени и пространству людей, хотя и такая община может иметь свое место и значение, но драгоценна та община людей всех времен и народов, которые сходятся в единой истине, в которой я встретился с такими далекими мне по месту и по времени людьми, и между прочим и с вами. Община, предстоящая теперь человечеству, составляется не из людей, к[оторые] соберутся вместе для того, чтобы осуществить известные экономические, выгодные для них самих, цели, как тот Trust,[4]о кот[ором] вы прислали мне описание; а из тех людей, которые рассыпаны везде и навсегда отреклись от всяких мирских целей и посвятили свою жизнь одному служению богу.
Все самые величайшие начинания кончались не только ничем, но обращались против того дела, которому они хотели служить, только вследствие поспешности, вследствие желания людей поскорее обратить как можно больше других людей или, если не обратить, то сделать их по внешнему виду подобными обращенным. Так, еще первый Павел начал урезывать требования Христа и приспосабливать их к существующему порядку; так, но уже в огромных размерах, извратил христианство Константин[5] для того, чтобы сделать его доступным себе и своему народу. Так же поступали все те вводители христианства в Англии, Франции, России, когда они почти насильно крестили свои народы. И так же извращают христианство все учредители и организаторы сект, от мормонов[6] до армии спасения; это же было и продолжает быть главным тормозом для распространения христианства.
Будем всеми силами держаться сами, для себя, всей истины во всем том свете, в котором она открылась нам, и этот свет неизбежно будет освещать людей вокруг нас, и эта же истина неизбежно соединит всех нас, если бы мы даже об этом не думали, потому что истина одна, и только она одна прочно соединяет людей.
Какие глубокомысленные и добрые начинания были начинания С. Симона,[7] Фурье,[8] Прудона,[9] Robert’a Owen’a[10] и сотни основателей общин в Америке, и что осталось от них? А как ничтожна была деятельность назаретского столяра,[11] которого повесили за не понравившиеся властям того времени речи, а какие огромные последствия.[12]
Анархизм есть поразительное знамение времени. Это начало разрушения старого порядка. А когда разрушается старое, нельзя строить. Одно, что можно, это указывать законность этого разрушения, возможность и необходимость новой постройки, и те основы, на которых она может быть сделана. In time like ours, when the existing order is falling to pieces under its own, weight, what the men are especially[13] маяк, который звал бы их к себе. И вот этот-то маяк надо стараться не затемнять. Это самое значительное и плодотворное дело, к[оторое] мы можем сделать.
Сбережем же на него все свои силы. Главное же напряжем все усилия и всё внимание на то, чтобы не отступить от истины, не умалить ее, не поддаться сознательно ни на какой компромисс. — Если мы в жизни не будем в состоянии вполне осуществить ту истину, к[оторую] мы знаем, то пусть будет виною этому одно наше несовершенство и слабость, а не сознательное умаление, искривление истины. Будем искать ц[арства] б[ожия] и правды его и твердо верить, что остальное (включая в него воздействие на других людей) само собой приложится нам.
Ваша деятельность мне тем особенно дорога, что вы не боитесь исповедовать всю истину, без тех ограничений, посредством которых ее делают бессильною. Мне очень понравилась therefore ваша article in the New Methodist.[14] Для того, чтобы огонь жег, тот огонь, к[оторый] Хр[истос] желал низвести на землю, нужно, чтобы он был огонь, а не потушенная, только дымящаяся лучина.
[15] Один из признаков исполнения закона Хр[иста] — единение. А мы все разбиты на партии, сословия,[16] народы, веры, секты, партии: политические, экономические, литературные, сословия: богатых, бедных, интеллигентных, народных,[17] аристократов, vulgo[18] народы, племена: разных цветов белых, черных, желтых... разные правительства, веры, секты: христианские, магометанские, еврейские, будист[ские] и куча других, и еще в каждой — секты. Как же тут основывать секты, communion, не бояться этого, не бояться увеличивать разъединения. Напротив, главное наше дело: ломать все перегородки, отделяющие нас, держаться только того, что единит не только с христианами, но с будистами, магометанами, дикими. В этом христианство.
