Dear friend,
I received your letter[1] and article on Truth and read it with great interest. I noticed in our conversations in Moscow,[2] that you held Truth and Love as the foundation of real Life, and I instinctively approoved this view without knowing, how you explained it, and therefore I was the more interested in your article. Your arguments for perfect truthfulness always are very strong and seem to me indisputable, but I missed in your article the exposition of the relation between Truth and Love and a more profound definition of Truth than of B. Johnson. I think that Love is God, is life itself, is that, what is godly in man, and that Love, which is God and therefore infinite, being enclosed in man, tends to expand itself, and that is the motion of life, which we feel in ourselves, and that the unique means for Love to manifest itself and to expand is Truth. Falsehood, and especially falsehood against oneself, hinders Love to manifest itself and to expand. Therefore truth is so necessary and is the first of our duties; therefore also all the so often hypocritically used admonitions to love one’s neighbour are false and vain. Love is God and God is infinite, and man cannot augment God. All what a man can and must do, is to put aside all hindrances for the manifestation of God, i. e. Love, which is in him. And there is only one thing, that hinders this manifestation: that is falsehood. And not to think and to speak lies, when a man knows, that what he thinks and what he says is not true, is in the power of man.
Therefore the first duty of man, who wishes to live a real life, is to be truthful in thoughts, words and deeds. And to this every man can tend and attain this «but». To be truthful in reference to your article, I must say, that I expected it stronger and shorter, especially the first part. You can write much better. You notice, that I always criticize your writings, it is because I love and esteem you and feel myself obliged to be so strict and severe in my judgements of you, as I try to be on myself.
I hope, that notwithstanding my bad English and my faults you will understand, what I wished to say.
My article on Vanderveer has been published in French Journal des Débats, I hope, that that shall not be an obstacle for the English publication.
Yours truly
Leo Tolstoy.
1896. 10 Nov.
Дорогой друг,
Преданный вам
Лев Толстой.
