28 July 1896.
Dear friend,
I have received your very interesting letter and I am anxious to answer you, especially about the transformation or rather spiritual growth, that is going on in our friends of the «Brotherhood Chucrh» (I do not like those names; they promise too much: it would be well, if in the transformation they would drop this name).[1]
I think, that a great part of the evil of the world is due to our wishing to see the realization of what we are striving at, but are not ready for, and therefore being satisfied with the semblance of that, which should be.
Compulsory governement organization is indeed nought else, than the semblance of good order, which is maintained by prisons, gallows, police, army and workhouses. Of real order there is none; only, that which infringes, it is hidden from our view in prisons, penal settlements and slums. And I think, that the dicease remains so long uncured, because it is concealed. So likewise with brotherhood or church communities. They also are semblances. There cannot be a community of saints among sinners. I think, that the members of a community in order to keep the semblance of sainthood must necessarily commit many new sins.
We are so created, that we cannot become perfect either one by one, or in groups, but (from the very nature of the case) only all together.
The warmth of any drop (or particle) is transmitted to all the others. And were it possible to conserve the heat of one particle, so that it should not pass to the others and therefore did not cool — it would only prove, that we took for heat, was not true heat.
And I therefore think, that were our friends to direct towards their inner spiritual growth all the portion of attention and energy, which they devote to the sustainement of the outer form of a community amongst themselves — it would be better both for them and for God’s cause. Communities and external organisations seem to me to be lawful and useful only, when they are inevitable consequences of a corresponding inner state. For instance, if two men, from a calculation, that it is more profitable to live in one house and eat one dinner, were to say to each other: «let us live in one house and eat one dinner», there would be very little chance, that they would stay and live together without subjecting themselves to many disadvantages and much disagreableness, which would outweigh the expected advantages and pleasure; but if two men who often met, came to love each other and also became utterly indifferent to the accomodation, they have, and the dinner, they eat, and were to say to each other: «why should we live separately, since we do not care about our accomodation and our dinner, and would like to live together?» — then there is every chance, that such men will live together until death. More than that: if only one of these men be indifferent to his comfort and dinner and loves the other, then also these men would get on together. Therefore the chief work for the organization of communities is in the soul of every man. Human beings are naturally drawn one towards another (therein is the mystery of God of love) and therefore in order to unite one need only make oneself capable of union; and then union will follow. If even we admit, that union is attained by our own effort, in that case we also must, as a preliminary to union, become ready for union.
I am also greatly interested in what you say about anarchists and their approach towards us. God, give it be so. Tell me more fully, what you know of this matter.
Now about your book. The book is not an artless narrative, in which one man imparts his feelings to an intimate friend; neither is it a work of art, in which the author intentionally puts, forth his ideas, feelings and observations in such a way, as to make the deepest impression upon his readers. This is the reason, why your book does not produce the desirable impression. It seems, as if the author too vividly felt that, which he wished to transmit, and was too sure, that the reader would feel the same, and therefore he fails to excite in the reader that feeling, which he himself had. There are many excellent details, which seem to be superfluous. A work of art requires strict artistic fashioning, of which there is not here sufficient. For me the book was good, and its fundamental idea expressed in the paraphrase of Paul — is very fine. This book, like every manifestation of your soul, more and more connects mine with yours.
May God help you in the path you are treading.
Yours truly
Leo Tolstoy.
Dear Friend,
I have received your very interesting letter and am very anxious to answer you, especially about the transformation or rather spiritual growth, that is going on in our friends of «The Brotherhood Church» (I don’t like those names; they promise too much.
It would be well if in the transformation they would drop this, name).[1]
Мне кажется, что большая доля зла мира происходит от того, что мы, желая видеть осуществление того, к чему мы стремимся и еще не готовы, — довольствуемся подобием того, что должно быть.
Насильническое государственное устройство ведь есть не что иное, как подобие благоустройства, которое поддерживается тюрьмами, виселицами, полицией, войском, домами трудолюбия (poor houses). Ведь благоустройства нет; только скрыто от взгляда по тюрьмам, ссылкам, трущобам (slums) — то, что нарушает его. И я думаю, что болезнь оттого так долго не излечивается, что она скрыта.
То же самое и община. Она тоже подобие. Община святых людей среди грешников не может существовать. Я думаю, что членам общины для того, чтобы соблюсти подобие святости общины, непременно приходится делать много новых грехов.
Мы так сотворены, что не можем стать совершенными ни поодиночке, ни группами, а непременно все вместе.
Всякое согревание одной капли передается всем остальным. Если же можно уберечь тепло одной капли, не давая сообщаться другим каплям, и потому не остывать, то это, значит, не настоящее тепло.
И потому думаю, что если наши друзья всю ту долю внимания и энергии, которую они направляли на поддержание внешней формы общения между собой, направят на внутренний духовный рост, то это будет лучше и для нас и для дела божия. Община и внешнее устройство, мне кажется, тогда только законно и полезно, когда оно есть неизбежное последствие внутреннего состояния. Напр[имер], если два человека, рассудив, что им выгоднее жить в одном доме, есть один обед, скажут себе: «Давайте жить вместе и есть один обед», то очень мало вероятия, что они останутся жить вместе и, вследствие этого сожития, не навлекут на себя, вместо выгоды и удовольствия, много невыгод и неприятностей; но если два человека, часто видящиеся, полюбили друг друга и вместе с тем стали совершенно равнодушны к помещению, в котором они живут, и к обеду, который они едят, скажут себе: «Зачем нам жить врозь, когда мы не дорожим помещением и обедом, а желаем жить вместе?» — то есть все вероятия, что такие люди умрут вместе. Мало того, если только один из этих людей будет равнодушен к жизни и обеду и будет любить другого, то и тогда эти люди уживутся. Поэтому главный труд для учреждения общины — в душе у каждого человека. Люди естественно влекутся друг к другу (в этом тайна бога любви), и потому, чтобы соединиться, нужно только сделать себя способным к соединению, а соединение уже совершится. Если даже допустить, что соединение совершаем мы своей силой, то и тогда, прежде соединения, нужно сделаться готовым к соединению.
Очень для меня интересно тоже то, что вы говорите про анархистов и их приближение к нам.[2] Дай бог. Сообщите еще, что знаете про это.
Теперь о вашей книге.[3] Я прочел ее и, любя и уважая вас, вам скажу всю правду. Книга не производит должного впечатления, во-первых, потому что она слишком сыра. Автор слишком живо чувствовал то, что передавал, и думал, что то же почувствуют читатели, и оттого не возбудил в читателе того чувства, которое сам испытывал. Потом, она не отделана. Много прекрасных подробностей излишних. Художественное произведение требует строгой художественной обработки, а тут ее нет, а вместе с тем характер произведения — художественный. Мне книга была хороша, и основная мысль ее, выраженная в перифразе Павла, прекрасна. Книга эта, как и всякое проявление ваше, всё больше и больше сближает меня с вами.
Помогай вам бог на том пути, по которому идете.
