Dear Sir,
You are asking me a question which I am trying to solve those 20 last years. When we for the first time understand what true Christian life should be and how far from this Christian life is the life that we are living, it seems to us so natural and so easy to abandon the false wordly life and [lead] the true, happy one, that we arе astonished of finding hindrances to this change and ascribe generally those hindrances to our exclusive position. But in this we are mistaken. We think that our Christian life will begin when wе will be free from our wordly ties, but it begins when we are trying to undo those ties, and this undoing them in a Christian fashion without acting contrary to the principle in the name of which wo are chan ging our life, i. e. the love and the absence of violence is the main thing for a Christian. So that I think that a Christian, — and you in your case — must not try to show to others what true life is, but to make in his soul the internal change, which will bring you not in the position, that you imagine yourself you must occupy, but which will be the necessary result of your internal change.
When the seventy came back to Christ and said to him, that the devils obeyed them, he answered: don’t be glad of your power over the devils, but try that your names should be written in Heaven.
I think that you know all this better than I, and will excuse me for writing what may be superfluous to you. I write this because I have been in the same position in which you are and know the feeling of decouragement which came over you, when the change in my life did not come so as I expected. Therefore I advise you to work with all your energy for the Kingdom of God within you, without making determinated plans for your personal life. Your external position will be the result of the internal change.
Do you know John Kenworthy and his church and his paper?[1] His adress is Croydon. I think you will find spiritual help in putting yourself in communication with him and his people. Lately there came into my neibourhood a friend of mine, a russian, V. Tchertkoff. I am sure he would like to know you and you him.
With brotherly love
Yours truly
Leo Tolstoy.
Милостивый государь,
Лев Толстой.
