Dear friend and brother,
The condition of the «Spirit Wrestlers» especially of those which have received the permission to emigrate is very bad. The government augments its pressure upon them. The governor of the Caucasus Golitzine has told them that if they remain true to their faith they will be kept in the same position i. e. be starved to death, and that if they give in, they will be restorted to their former welfare. Many, — nearly 200 of them could not hold out and did recant from their faith, saying that they know it si wrong but they could not longer wittness the sufferings of their families. But those which remain true are in a desperate condition. They are nearly 3000, but they have in all no more than 70 000 roubles, which is not half enough for their emigration, especially because they must pay 10 r. per head for their passeports. Our friend from the christian Commonwealth has sent to me a proposition to settle them in Texas.[1] I forwarded this letter to the English Committee for the emigration of the Douchoborys, and this proposition pleased very much to the Douchoborys themselves.
Now what I ask of you is that you should inform us i. e. the commitee in England (adress Kenworthy or Tchertkoff), how much acres could they have in Texas at what price; 2) that you should inform us also at what price the ships could take the men for the passage and 3) to rise in America a subscription for an emigration fund for the Duochoborys. — I have collected till now about 5000. They defend to publish about it in Russia.[2] But I will nevertheless try to collect more by personal [appeals] to persons who can and will help.
If you will be so good to do what I ask you, please write about it to me and to Tchertkoff.
I admired very much your declaration about the war.[3] Please excuse the negligence of my letter. I have been very ill for a month and [am] not still well.
With sincere love yours truly
Leo Tolstoy.
11 July 1898.
What do you know about C. F. Willard of Chicago who propose to settle the Douchoborys in America?
Дорогой друг и брат,
Искренно любящий вас
Лев Толстой.
