My dear friend,
I am very thankful to you and your friends for the remembrance of my birthday.[1] I would very much like to use this opportunity to present to you and your friends more vividly the significance of the case of the Douchobortsy. I have just written a letter article entitled: «The two wars», which I have no time to translate but the contents of which I would like to communicate to you.[2] I say, that in our time there were two wars going on: one the Spanish American war, which is finished, and the other war against war which is still going on and which will finish only with all the wars in the world. This is the war, that the Douchobortsy and all the true Christians are making against the Russian and all the military government. I hear that you have great heroes who have killed a great many nearly unarmed men (the spanishs were unarmed in comparison with Americans). I got letters from Americans, who engage me to write about this noble work of their sailors and soldiers as they call it.[3] But I find that the work done by the American army and fleet was quite the opposite of noble and all these heroes are disgusting. I can imagine an old weak man full of superstitions, who thinks, that he can solve a dispute by boxing, but when I see a young a strong man who by his culture and the ideas of his time ought be know better accept the challenge of the old man and beat this silly old man and be proud of it, I am quite disgusted. And this is the aspect of the American war. I dont speak of the motives of the war, or better say the pretext, because there can not be true motives for a war, for killing people with the purpose of making people happy. So I dont speak of the pretext, but of the war itself.
And in this hideous war they glorifie heroes and the whole world is silly enough to listen to all this cruel nonsense instead of faire honte à ceux qui proclament toutes ces horreurs comme des hautefaits. And in the meantime ther are in an other war which is going on in the whole world real true heroes who being martyrised, alone without witnesses, who could support them in wildernesses of central Asia and Siberia hold to their conviction and cover with shame their tyrants, and spread the truth and destroy the organisation of war. And nobody knows those heroes and take interst in them. But I think that not only Christians but truly civilized persons ought to despise all those hideous pagan heroes which are very proud to have killed many brothers and to have make retrograde the human conscience and to be in spiritual union with those other true heroes who perish alone not for the opinion of men but for God and humanity and help them as much as we can.
I hope that your friends will not be shoked by my antipatriotic feelings and also excuse my bad expressing of them.
Yours truly Leo Tolstoy.
Дорогой друг,
Искренне ваш Лев Толстой.
