My dear friend,
I duly received your letter and magazine, both of which afforded me great pleasure. The first number is very good and I liked all the articles in it. It is quite true, as you say it in your article «The Social Need»[1], and Herron[2] in his, that a Christian life is quite impossible in the present unchristian organization of society. The contradictions between his surroundings and his convictions are very painful for a man who is sincere in his сhristian faith, and therefore the organization of communities seems to such a man the only means of delivering himself from these contradictions. But this is an illusion. Every community is a small island in the mist of an ocean of unchristian conditions of life, so that the christian relations exist only between members of the colony but outside that must remain unchristian, otherwise the colony would not exist for a moment. And therefore to live in community cannot save a christian from the contradiction between his conscience and his life. I do not mean to say that I do not approve of communities such as your commonwealth, or that I do not think them to be a good thing. On the contrary, I approve of them with all my heart and am very interested in your commonwealth and wish it the greatest success.
I think that every man who can free himself from the conditions of wordly life without breaking the ties of love — love the main principle in the name of which he seeks new forms of life — I think such a man not only must, but naturally join people who have the same beliefs and who try to live up to them. If I were free I would immediately even at my age join such a colony. I only wished to say that the mere forming of communities is not a solution for the christian problem, but is only one of the means of its solution. The revolution that is going on for the attainment of the christian ideal is so enormous, our life is so different from what it ought to be, that for the perfect success of this revolution, for the concordance of conscience and life, is needed the work of all men — men living in communities as well as men of the world living in the most different conditions. This ideal is not so quickly and so simply attained, as we think and wish it. This ideal will be attained only when every
man in the whole world will say: Why should I sell my services and buy yours? If mine are greater than yours I owe them to you, because if there is in the whole world one man who does not think and act by this principle, and who, will take and keep by violence, what he can take from others, no man can live a true christian life, as well in a community as outside it. We cannot be saved separately, we must be saved all together. And this can be attained only through the modification of the conception of life i. e. the faith of all men; and to this end we must work all together — men living in the world as well as men living in communities.
We must all of us remember that we are messengers from the great King — the God of Love with the message of unity and
love between all living beings. And therefore we must not for a minute forget our mission and do all what we thilk useful and agreable for ourselves only so long as it is not in opposition to our mission which is to be accomplished not only by words, but by example and especially by the infection of love.
Please give my respect and love to the colonists ans ask them not to be offended by me giving them advice, which may be unnecessary. I advice them to remember that all material questions of: money, implements, nourishment, even the very existence of the colony itself, — all those things are of little importance in comparison of the sole important object of our life: to preserve love amongst all men, which we come in contact with. If with the object of keeping the food of the colony or of protecting the thrift of it you must quarel with a friend or with a stranger, must excite ill-feelings in somebody, it is better to give up everything, than to act against love. And let our friends not dread that the strict following of the princip will destroy the practical work. Even the practical work will flourish — not as we expect it, but in its own way, only by strict following the law of love and will perish by acting in opposition to it.
Your friend and brother
Leo Tolstoy.
March 23. 1898.
I had just finished this letter, when I received from the Caucasus news from the Duchoborys («spirit wrestlers») that they had received an authorization to leave Russia and emigrate abroad.[3] They write to me that they have the intention of going to England or America. They are about 10.000 men. They are the most religious, moral and leborious, and very strong people. The Russian government has by all sorts of persecutions quite ruined them and they have not the means to emigrate. I will write about it to the papers in America and England.[4] Meanwhile you will oblige me — you and your friend Herron, Crosby, and others — if you give me some suggestions about this matter.
Yours L. T.
Дорогой друг,
Ваш друг и брат
Лев Толстой.
Ваш
Л. Т.
