Kenjiro Tokutomi.
April 25-th 1906.
Toula, Jassnaya Poliana.
Dear friend,
I received a long time ago your two books[1] and your letter. It would be too long and unnecessary to state the reasons why I did not answer you till now.[2] Please excuse me for it. I hope and desire that this letter of mine will find you in the same place, in good health and in the same good disposition towards me, in which yours was written.
I did not quite understand through your letter, nor through your book — your conception of life, and would be very thankful if you would explain to me your religious views. I am very much interested in the religious beliefs of the Japanese. I have an idea of Shintoism, but doubt that thinking Japanese men of our time can partake of this faith. I know Konfutionism, Taoism and Bouddism and have the greatest respect for the religious and metaphysical principles of those doctrines, which are the same as the fundamental principles of Christianity. There is only one religion which manifests itself by different sides to different nations, and should very much like to know the Japanese view of the fundamental religious principles. In European littеrature I could not find any vestige of it. If you can help me in this matter, if only by stating your religious views, I will be very thankful.
By religious views I understand the answer to the chief and most important question for man, what is the meaning of the life that he is obliged to live.
You speak in your letter of the Russian revolution and the reforms that are to be in Japan. I think that there is only one revolution and one reform impending everywhere in the world: it is the destruction of not only all great states, but of all kind of states, the liberation of men from obedience to human power.
I have written a book about it (the last) which has for title «The end of the age». It has been translated into english[3] and I will ask my friend in England[4] to send you a copy, but may be you can get one in your libraries. Please let me have your opinion on the ideas expressed in that book.
I thank you heartily for your letter, your books and your sympathy to me. Give please my regards to your wife and ask her, if it is not presuming too much, to write me, if it is possible in a few words her religious belief: what does she live for and what is the highest law of her life, the law to which all other human laws and desires ought to be sacrificed.
Кенджиро Токутоми.
Апреля 25-го 1906.
Тула, Ясная Поляна.
Дорогой друг,
