3/16 Febr. 1907.
Toula, Jasnaja Poliana.
Dear Brother,
It gives me joy to address you thus because I keenly feel my brotherhood to a man who, although physically so very far, is spiritually so very near to me.
I have just finished to read your book «Krishna» and am under a very strong impression of it.
I knew the teaching of Krishna before, but never had such a clear insight of it as I got from both parts of your book.
Knowing you by your book I will reject all wordly considerations and be quite open with you, not fearing to hurt you by what I have to say.
The metaphysical religious idea of the doctrine of Krishna, so well exposed in your book, is the eternal and universal foundation of all true philosophies and all religions.
The truth that the principle of all that exists we cannot otherwise feel and understand than as Love and that the soul of man is an emanation of this principle, the development of which is what we call human life — is a truth that is more or less consciously felt by every man and therefore accessible to the most scientifically developed minds as well as to the most simple. This truth is the foundation of the religion of Krishna and of all religions. But in the religion of Krishna, as well as in all ancient religions, there are statements which not only cannot be proved, but which are clearly products of uncontrolled imagination and which, moreover, are quite unnecessary for the conception of the essential truth and the affirmation of rules of conduct which flow out of the fundamental principle.
Such are all the cosmological and historical affirmations of creations, durability of the world, all the stories of miracles, the theory of the four ages and the immoral and contradictory to the fundamental principle organization of casts.
Dear friend and brother, the task which is before you is to state the truth common to all men, which can and must unify the whole humanity in one and the same faith, and one and the same rule of conduct based on it. Humanity must unite in one and the same faith, because the soul of every man — as you know it — only seems to be multiple and different in every individual, but is one in all beings. And therefore, dear brother, I think that you ought to put aside your national traditions and likings and expose only the great universal truth of your religion.
Abnegation is necessary not only in individual likings but also in national partialities. We must sacrifice our national, poetical likings to the great goal that we have before us: to attain and confess the main truth, which alone can unife all men.
To work at this great goal is, as I think, your vocation and your duty.
I tried for many years to work in this direction and if the remnants of my life can be good for anything, it is only for the same work. Will we work together for it?
Your brother, and I hope your co-worker,
Leo Tolstoy.
P. S. I hope that my bad English will not hinder you to understand me. Please not to publish this letter. In writing it I wished only to enter in spiritual intercourse with you, which I suppose can help us both in our spiritual life.
3/16 февр. 1907.
Тула, Ясная Поляна.
Дорогой брат,
Ваш брат и, надеюсь, ваш соработник
Лев Толстой.
