Jasnaya Poliana, Tula, Russia,
March 31-st 1909.
The fulfilment of Henry George’s teaching, i. e. the emancipation of the land from the right of property or, speaking more accurately, the emancipation of men from enlavery through the right of property of some over the land is in our time as urgently necessary, as was fifty years ago the emancipation of men in America and Russia from direct slavery.
Unfortunately, as direct slave-owners endeavoured with all their power to retain direct slavery, which was advantageous for them, so also at the present time the wealthy classes use all their power for the retention of indirect slavery based upon landed property.
In Russia, where people have never recognised landed property, this infamous action is particularly loathsome on the part of a stupid and coarse government which is endeavouring not only to retain the slaves in their servitude, but also by depraving the people to intensify their slavery in the future. I regard as stupid the action of our present government, because if it had put into practice Henry Georgeis principle that land cannot become exclusive property, — a principle always recognised and still recognised by the great mass of the Russian peasantry, — this measure alone, more effectually than all the acts of violence and cruelty now being accomplished by the government, would have pacified the people, and rendered impossible the codtinuation of the revolution. Whereas the Russian government has had recourse to a measure pricisely contrary to such an one by encouraging in every way the transference of the land from communal ownership to private individual ownership.[1] In this I see the government's astounding stupidity. Whilst in those measures which the government applies for the repression of the dissafection amongst the people naturally flowing from their want in land, is manifested the government’s astounding cruelty.
Therefore the activity of the Single-Tax League organised in England is especially gladdening.
Henry George is especially to be appreciated by those who profess Christianity in its true sense, for not only are the foundations of his teaching, but also his methods truly Christian. As Jesus in his utterance, «Ye have heard that it was said: Thou shalt not kill,... but I say unto you, Resist not evil», has pointed out that the commandment, «Thou shalt not kill», never, absolutely in no case, can be broken, that neither may the pretext of retribution or of defence serve as a reason for the violation of this commandment; exactly so does Henry George point out that the commandment «Thou shalt not steal», can and should in no case be violated, and that as the pretext of right of property of some on the land they have occupied or are cultivating, so also the pretext of depriving people of the produce of their labour in the guise of taxes for public needs may not be a reason for breaking the commandment, «Thou shalt not steal». As in the law of non-resistance to evil by violence, i. e. the prohibition of killing under any circumstances whatever, has been elucidated the injustice and harmfulness of the justification of violence under pretext of defence and common good, so also in Henry George’s teaching on the equal rights of all to the land, has been elucidated the injustice and harmfulness of the justification of robbery and theft under the pretext of either the exclusive right of some people to the land, or the depriving of those who lobour of the produce of their labour in order to use it for social needs.
In this lies the essence of George’s teaching. However those, who need to do so, may endeavour to conceal this teaching, it is so clear and indisputable that it cannot but be recognised by mankind.
God help you. On your side are Justice, reason, love. On your side is God, and therefore you cannot but be successful.
After writing this I have read in «The Open Road» for March 1909, an excellent article, «The Single Tax» by the «Odd Man».[2]
I presume you have read it. If not, I would allow myself to advise you to include it in your book.[3]
Leo Tolstoy.
Исполнение учения Генри Джорджа, т. е. освобождение земли от права собственности, или, выражаясь точнее, освобождение людей от порабощения посредством права собственности некоторых на землю, в наше время так же настоятельно необходимо, как было 50 лет тому назад освобождение людей в Америке и России от прямого рабства.
К сожалению, как тогда прямые рабовладельцы всеми силами старались удержать выгодное для них непосредственное рабство, так и теперь богатые классы употребляют все силы на удержание посредственного, устанавливаемого через земельную собственность рабства.
В России, где народ никогда не признавал земельной собственности, теперь эта позорная деятельность глупого и грубого правительства, старающегося не только удержать рабов в их рабстве, но и, развратив народ, закабалить их в будущем, особенно отвратительна. Глупыми я считаю действия нашего теперешнего правительства в особенности потому, что вместо применения к жизни мысли Генри Джорджа о том, что земля не может быть исключительной собственностью, мысли, всегда разделявшейся и теперь еще сознаваемой всей огромной массой русского крестьянства, — меры, которая одна сильнее всяких совершаемых теперь насилий и жестокостей, умиротворила бы народ и сделала бы невозможным продолжение революции, — оно, правительство, употребило как раз обратную меру, поощряя всеми средствами переход земли из общего владения в отдельную частную собственность.[1] В этом я вижу поразительную глупость правительства. В тех же мерах, которые употребляются для подавления естественно вытекающего из этого недовольства в народе, проявляется и его поразительная жестокость.
И потому деятельность образовавшихся в Англии лиг для распространения идей Генри Джорджа особенно радостна.
Генри Джордж особенно дорог людям, исповедующим христианство в его истинном смысле, потому что не только основы его учения, но и приемы его истинно христианские. Как Христос в словах: «Вам сказано не убий, а я говорю: не противься злу», указывает на то, что заповедь не убий никогда, ни в каких случаях не может быть нарушена, что ни предлог возмездия, ни защиты не может быть поводом отступления от заповеди; точно так же указывает и Генри Джордж на то, что заповедь не укради никогда, ни в каких случаях не может и не должна быть нарушена, и что как предлог права собственности одних людей на занятую или обрабатываемую ими землю, точно так же и предлог отбирания у людей произведений их труда в виде податей для общественных нужд не может быть поводом к отступлению от заповеди не укради. Как в законе непротивления злу насилием, т. е. запрещения убийства в каких бы то ни было случаях, выяснена несправедливость и зловредность оправдания насилия и убийства под предлогом защиты или общего блага, так и в учении Генри Джорджа о равном общем праве всех людей на землю выяснена несправедливость и зловредность оправдания грабежа и воровства, под предлогом ли исключительного права людей на землю или под предлогом отбирания у трудящихся произведений их труда для употребления на общественные нужды.
В этом сущность учения Джорджа.
Как ни стараются те, кому это нужно, скрыть это учение, оно так ясно и бесспорно, что не может не быть признано людьми.
Помогай же вам бог. На вашей стороне справедливость, разум, любовь. На вашей стороне бог, и потому вы не можете не иметь успеха.
Уже после написания этой заметки я прочел в Open Road за март 1909 превосходную статью The single Tax by the Odd Man.[2] Думаю, что статья эта вам известна, если же нет, то позволяю себе советовать вам включить ее в ваш сборник.[3]
Лев Толстой.
3 марта 1909.
